Anonymous Reporting of Tax Offences - iWhistle!
BLOG 23/12/2020

Ever witnessed forms of tax malpractices or corruption among KRA staff and wondered what action to take next? Worry no more, we got you!

KRA recently launched an online web-based reporting solution dubbed iWhistle, that provides a framework for KRA Staff and members of the public to report bribery, concealment, conflict of interest, evasion, tax fraud, abuse of office, diversion of goods, tax evasion, manufacturing of counterfeit goods and other tax related crimes, upon seeing, hearing or suspecting the aforesaid.

 

Initially, Kenyans would report tax related crimes through emails, phone calls and walk ins. In as much as several complaints were received by KRA, these processes were long, tedious and did not allow for anonymity and efficiency. This system however provides full anonymity to the informer as it
auto-generates an identity that the informer uses to conveniently log in, to not only report, but also follow up on the progress of their report.

 

With the introduction of iWhistle, the informant is also entitled to certain rights, such as: right to report and remain anonymous, right to be protected in case of court witnessing, getting updates on the proceedings of the investigation and case, as well as a right to receive a reward should they opt to upon settlement of a reported case. This reward nonetheless is dependent on revenue recovered from tax fraud / tax evasion schemes and includes whichever is less of 5% of the taxes or duties so recovered, or KShs. 2 million per case. However, it is worth noting that as soon as you opt for a reward, you lose your anonymity.

 

Members of the public can access the portal via https://iwhistle.kra.go.ke and click on ‘REPORT NOW’ icon. There is an instruction manual prompted by the system on how to generate a unique anonymous account that one will use to report tax malpractices. Examples of documents or details that one can provide when reporting include financial records / bank statements / pay bill and Till Numbers / Personal Identification Number (PIN) / Mobile Contacts of the violator or location of the business or offender.

 

It is estimated that Kenya loses over KShs. 400 million annually to tax crimes. This new initiative will help curb tax leaks through sealing tax evasion and corruption related loopholes, which deny the country billions in revenue over time.

By Cynthiah Kerubo

Tax Education Division