TITLE 3

1.	Introduction
Data and information are arguably the most important by-product of various organizations. Many organizations collect and generate various bytes of information and store them in various media storage devices or their own systems. Furthermore, data is extremely valuable as it opens up avenues and ideas on how to better serve customer needs and generate new income streams for organizations. Therefore, there is a need to structure, document and archive newer and older data should it be required at a later date.

2.	Proposed System
An electronic system can be created to handle the lifecycle of data from its creation to its eventual deletion. The system should cater for the storing, documentation, retrieval and archiving of data.

2.1 Archiving
Archiving is the process of moving files that are no longer actively used to a separate storage device for long-term retention. Archived files are still important to the organization and may be needed for future reference or must be retained for regulatory compliance. Archives should be indexed and searchable so that files can be easily located and retrieved.
As part of the lifecycle of information, archiving is an important final stage. Keeping too much old information available online consumes valuable storage which could be better used for newer information. There are good reasons to archive content rather than simply delete it. Laws may require content to be kept for specific periods. Internal and external audits may require document retention. Preserving information as a part of history is another worthy goal. And there are times when information which had been thought to be no longer useful later turns out to be needed. Archiving information addresses each of these requirements.

2.2 Document management
Tracking and storing electronic documents and/or images of paper documents, keeping track of the different versions, and archiving as needed. A document management system (DMS) is technology that provides a comprehensive solution for managing the creation, capture, indexing, storage, retrieval, and disposition of the records and information assets of an organization.

2.3 Records management 
Maintaining the records of an organization from the time they are created up to their eventual disposal; this may include classifying, storing, securing, archiving, and destroying records. Records management is knowing what you have, where you have it, how long you have to keep it and how secure it is.
 
3.	Target Customers

3.1 Organizations
An electronic archiving system could help organizations declutter their database systems. The organizations would focus on only required data and archive all the old and unused data to a third party. This will greatly improve the performance of their systems and save on funds that would be used to upgrade their storage systems while keeping old data as long as possible.
Hardcopy documents could be scanned converted to softcopy documents to ensure a more paperless system that would adhere to “green’’ initiatives.

3.2 Individuals
Individuals could use the system to store their important documents, photos, and other electronic information, structure them and retrieve them when required.
Individuals could also have their hardcopy documents scanned and stored in the system for easy retrieval and secure storage.

4.	Similar Software

4.1 Google Drive, Apple Cloud and Microsoft One Drive
Google, Microsoft and Apple already have cloud systems for document storage and management. Furthermore, these systems are accessible from most devices, free and only charge additional fees to increase storage space.

4.1.1 Shortcomings
These systems only cater for internet capable devices and can only be used with such devices. They therefore do not cater for older less capable devices.
These software leave the data storage structure up to the user and only provide storage space.
The software allows the sharing of information, but do not work with other existing systems to make it easier for users to perform certain tasks e.g. getting documents notarized

5.	Requirements

The following are software and hardware resources that would be required to cater for the proposed solution:

1.	A multipage scanner to capture hardcopy devices

Suggested Devices
	Fujitsu ScanSnap iX1500 Color Duplex Document Scanner with Touch Screen for Mac and PC [Current Model, 2018 Release] - $399.99
	Epson WorkForce ES-400 Color Duplex Document Scanner for PC and Mac, Auto Document Feeder (ADF) - $324.99
	Fujitsu fi-7160 Color Duplex Document Scanner - Workgroup Series - $879.99

2.	Server space for cloud storage preferably at least 100TB. (Could increase depending on amount of data stored)
6.	Challenges

•	The system would need to be always online in order to achieve the intended purpose. Which would require constant electricity and maintenance to achieve security.
•	Data would need extensive security measures to ensure data safety and privacy.
•	Advancements in data storge capabilities of personal devices could hinder the need for a third-party data storage solution.
•	The system would need to be cheap and affordable while still providing enough space to remain competitive.
•	Long development time in order to build, implement and deploy and implement the required security measures. Estimated time for completion could be between 3 to 6 months.

7.	Conclusion
An archive system is a viable solution for organizational or individual storage needs. However, the system would need to ensure extensive security and data privacy as well as be able to scale up to fit the ever-growing data and information generated by organizations. 
